docs/game-design-document.md, before:

# Game Design Document

This document will be the blueprint from which the game is built. Every single detail necessary to build the game will be addressed here. Be as descriptive as possible. Think bigger than what you are able to develop then write it all down.

## 1.  Title Page

### 1.1.    Game Name – Perhaps also add a subtitle or high concept sentence.
TBA
A family unfairly split must grow together to overcome everything and once again become whole.

## 2.  Game Overview

### 2.1.    Game Concept
A wife loses her soulmate. A daughter and son lose their parent. They all lose their home. They are now on the run and searching for a way to bring their family back together.

### 2.2.    Genre
Action/adventure/puzzle. There will be combat. There will be exploration. There will be obstacles that need to be resolved. Preferably there will be multiple solutions to problems, depending on the abilities that each character has.

### 2.3.    Target Audience
Mainly adults and that is not because there will be adult only content in the game. In fact, I'd like to steer away from that if possible simple because it earns an automatic no from a large group of players. The target is adults mainly because the emotional content of the story will only really resonate with those that have encountered loss as well as togetherness in times of hardship.

### 2.4.    Game Flow Summary – How does the player move through the game.   Both through framing interface and the game itself.
The player moves through the game in two main modes:
1) Controlling one or more of the main characters at once to fight, solve a puzzle, or search the environment. Possible modes would be switching through one character at a time and letting AI take care of the others or by using differnt inputs to control each character. The second option is markedly more difficult for the player, but it could be used to reinforce the difficulties faced by the mother caused by raising two children not only by herself but while also on the run.
2) The second mode is mainly passive conversation or cutscenes used between the times when the first mode is used. This will normally be through setting up camp and what happens throughout the night. There may be choices to be made here. No idea yet on whether choices will impact the game much or not.

### 2.5.    Look and Feel – What is the basic look and feel of the game?  What is the visual style?
The look can be described as a "late afternoon Breath of the Wild" color scheme with the smooth movement and sharp contrasts of Samurai Jack.

## 3.  Gameplay and  Mechanics

### 3.1.    Gameplay
The main mode of active player interaction with the game will consist of:
- An as of yet undetermined number of setpiece battles with monsters or people as the circumstances would have them. There will likely be some unique mechanics per battle (ex. climb to higher ground if you're fighting a giant cyclops).
- Finding particular people/items. These should be deduced from hints dropped throughout the game. The end goal is likely to appease a diety in some way and part of that process will probably involve needing to collect precious items. I hate fetch quests so preferably the items will have a more tangible effect. They could possibly grant some new abilities or unlock new areas. Just...no "go collect 10 boar skins" "thanks, here's your gold" please. If we're collecting boar skins then we better be putting them to use. Maybe they're used to create warmer clothes so we can go explore a colder climate. Everything has a purpose. Chekhov's gun and all that.
- Puzzle solving will likely be a requirement for accessing particular areas. There's likely a series of items selections/specific movements required to get into a shrine, out or imprisonment, through a dungeon, etc.

#### 3.1.1.  Game Progression
Game progression will be mostly linear, mission based, marked by a clear day/night cycle in between major events. There may be some side digressions to learn more about the characters and lore, but the end goal should be ever-present and should poke and prod the player to continue if they're taking too long.

#### 3.1.2.  Mission/challenge Structure
The missions should be built in order to highlight at least one of the following:
- a character's ability
- personality traits, with slightly more emphasis on negative ones (the goal is to display the hardship that the family must endure)
- a goal point (getting a particular item, starving the enemy of resources, defeating a particular foe)

#### 3.1.3.  Puzzle Structure
Puzzle structure will likely be unique in each instance. The game should not feel repetitive and puzzles should be just a prevalent as fighting or dialog trees. Puzzles should serve a purpose to the plot instead of existing purely to test the player's logical prowess.

#### 3.1.4.  Objectives – What are the objectives of the game?
The point of the game is to observe the difficulties faced by a family and see how they can be overcome. We're not here to make leaderboards with high scores or to create the most gruesome killcams. We're here to tell a story and get the player to form an attachment to the characters. They should want they characters to resolve their conflicts; they should want to see the family reunited; they should want the children to grow into good people.

#### 3.1.5.  Play Flow – How does the game flow for the game player
We're looking for multiple [Man in Hole](http://www.openculture.com/2014/02/kurt-vonnegut-masters-thesis-rejected-by-u-chicago.html) scenarios to keep attention and emotions ebbing and flowing.

### 3.2.    Mechanics – What are the rules to the game, both implicit and explicit.  This is the model of the universe that the game works under.  Think of it as a simulation of a world, how do all the pieces interact?  This actually can be a very large section.

#### 3.2.1.  Physics – How does the physical universe work?
Everything works as expected. Gravity, math, and all the fun stuff is still there. There are unique and/or unnatural beings that may bend or break rules though. More to come as those things are specified.

#### 3.2.2.  Movement in the game
Normally we're looking at freely moving left and right with jumping, ducking, rolling, climbing, swimming, etc. as necessary to navigate the environment.

#### 3.2.3.  Objects – how to pick them up and move them
Most objects will likely be unique items that grant a new ability/appearance to a character. Outside of that there will probably be items to pick up and save in an inventory, though inventory management is not going to happen. Think of just about everything as a key item required for progression.

#### 3.2.4.  Actions, including whatever switches and buttons are used, interacting with objects, and what means of communication are used
TBA based on what is called for by the story.

#### 3.2.5.  Combat – If there is combat or even conflict, how is this specifically modeled?
Depends on the situation. Since each situation should be unique there will likely be times that you're fighting hand-to-hand, times when you're manning the cannons on a ship, climbing and stabbing Shadow of the Collosus style, aiming with a bow, etc. As the story is approved we'll have more to define here.

#### 3.2.6.  Economy – What is the economy of the game? How does it work?
There's a currency used by the majority of the people you interact with, but what's worth more is your relationships built with these people. For instance, you want a particular merchant to decide to expand in a province that will help the your side more than your enemy. He could be bribed for a large amount of money or you could do a favor or two for him to grease the wheels a bit.

#### 3.2.7.  Screen Flow -- A graphical description of how each screen is related to every other and a description of the purpose of each screen.
Home Screen: where you start the game. There's a new game button and a load button.
Cutscene Screen: A cutscene will be loaded and played. Give the player a skip button after they've seen it once.
Mission Screen: UI changes per mission.
Night Screen: Dialog flows with occasional buttons to show choices for the characters.

### 3.3.    Game Options – What are the options and how do they affect game play and mechanics?

### 3.4.    Replaying and Saving

### 3.5.    Cheats and Easter Eggs

## 4.  Story, Setting and Character

### 4.1.    Story and Narrative – Includes back story, plot elements, game progression, and cut scenes.  Cut scenes descriptions include the actors, the setting, and the storyboard or script.

###4.2.    Game World

#### 4.2.1.  General look and feel of world

#### 4.2.2.  Areas, including the general description and physical characteristics as well as how it relates to the rest of the world (what levels use it, how it connects to other areas)

### 4.3.    Characters.  Each character should include the back story, personality, appearance, animations, abilities, relevance to the story and relationship to other characters

## 5.  Levels

### 5.1.    Levels.  Each level should include a synopsis, the required introductory material (and how it is provided), the objectives, and the details of what happens in the level.  Depending on the game, this may include the physical description of the map, the critical path that the player needs to take, and what encounters are important or incidental.

### 5.2.    Training Level

## 6.  Interface

### 6.1.    Visual System.  If you have a HUD, what is on it?  What menus are you displaying? What is the camera model?

### 6.2.    Control System – How does the game player control the game?   What are the specific commands?

### 6.3.    Audio, music, sound effects

### 6.4.    Help System

## 7.  Artificial Intelligence

### 7.1.    Opponent  and Enemy AI – The active opponent that plays against the game player and therefore requires strategic decision making

### 7.2.    Non-combat and Friendly Characters

### 7.3.    Support AI -- Player and Collision Detection, Pathfinding

## 8.  Technical

### 8.1.    Target Hardware

### 8.2.    Development hardware and software, including Game Engine

### 8.3.    Network requirements

## 9.  Game Art – Key assets, how they are being developed.  Intended style.

Commit message:

Updating GDD as much as possible

docs/game-design-document.md, after:

# Game Design Document

This document will be the blueprint from which the game is built. Every single detail necessary to build the game will be addressed here. Be as descriptive as possible. Think bigger than what you are able to develop then write it all down.

## 1.  Title Page

### 1.1.    Game Name – Perhaps also add a subtitle or high concept sentence.
TBA
A family unfairly split must grow together to overcome everything and once again become whole.

## 2.  Game Overview

### 2.1.    Game Concept
A wife loses her soulmate. A daughter and son lose their parent. They all lose their home. They are now on the run and searching for a way to bring their family back together.

### 2.2.    Genre
Action/adventure/puzzle. There will be combat. There will be exploration. There will be obstacles that need to be resolved. Preferably there will be multiple solutions to problems, depending on the abilities that each character has.

### 2.3.    Target Audience
Mainly adults and that is not because there will be adult only content in the game. In fact, I'd like to steer away from that if possible simple because it earns an automatic no from a large group of players. The target is adults mainly because the emotional content of the story will only really resonate with those that have encountered loss as well as togetherness in times of hardship.

### 2.4.    Game Flow Summary – How does the player move through the game.   Both through framing interface and the game itself.
The player moves through the game in two main modes:
1) Controlling one or more of the main characters at once to fight, solve a puzzle, or search the environment. Possible modes would be switching through one character at a time and letting AI take care of the others or by using differnt inputs to control each character. The second option is markedly more difficult for the player, but it could be used to reinforce the difficulties faced by the mother caused by raising two children not only by herself but while also on the run.
2) The second mode is mainly passive conversation or cutscenes used between the times when the first mode is used. This will normally be through setting up camp and what happens throughout the night. There may be choices to be made here. No idea yet on whether choices will impact the game much or not.

### 2.5.    Look and Feel – What is the basic look and feel of the game?  What is the visual style?
The look can be described as a "late afternoon Breath of the Wild" color scheme with the smooth movement and sharp contrasts of Samurai Jack.

## 3.  Gameplay and  Mechanics

### 3.1.    Gameplay
The main mode of active player interaction with the game will consist of:
- An as of yet undetermined number of setpiece battles with monsters or people as the circumstances would have them. There will likely be some unique mechanics per battle (ex. climb to higher ground if you're fighting a giant cyclops).
- Finding particular people/items. These should be deduced from hints dropped throughout the game. The end goal is likely to appease a diety in some way and part of that process will probably involve needing to collect precious items. I hate fetch quests so preferably the items will have a more tangible effect. They could possibly grant some new abilities or unlock new areas. Just...no "go collect 10 boar skins" "thanks, here's your gold" please. If we're collecting boar skins then we better be putting them to use. Maybe they're used to create warmer clothes so we can go explore a colder climate. Everything has a purpose. Chekhov's gun and all that.
- Puzzle solving will likely be a requirement for accessing particular areas. There's likely a series of items selections/specific movements required to get into a shrine, out or imprisonment, through a dungeon, etc.

#### 3.1.1.  Game Progression
Game progression will be mostly linear, mission based, marked by a clear day/night cycle in between major events. There may be some side digressions to learn more about the characters and lore, but the end goal should be ever-present and should poke and prod the player to continue if they're taking too long.

#### 3.1.2.  Mission/challenge Structure
The missions should be built in order to highlight at least one of the following:
- a character's ability
- personality traits, with slightly more emphasis on negative ones (the goal is to display the hardship that the family must endure)
- a goal point (getting a particular item, starving the enemy of resources, defeating a particular foe)

#### 3.1.3.  Puzzle Structure
Puzzle structure will likely be unique in each instance. The game should not feel repetitive and puzzles should be just a prevalent as fighting or dialog trees. Puzzles should serve a purpose to the plot instead of existing purely to test the player's logical prowess.

#### 3.1.4.  Objectives – What are the objectives of the game?
The point of the game is to observe the difficulties faced by a family and see how they can be overcome. We're not here to make leaderboards with high scores or to create the most gruesome killcams. We're here to tell a story and get the player to form an attachment to the characters. They should want they characters to resolve their conflicts; they should want to see the family reunited; they should want the children to grow into good people.

#### 3.1.5.  Play Flow – How does the game flow for the game player
We're looking for multiple [Man in Hole](http://www.openculture.com/2014/02/kurt-vonnegut-masters-thesis-rejected-by-u-chicago.html) scenarios to keep attention and emotions ebbing and flowing.

### 3.2.    Mechanics – What are the rules to the game, both implicit and explicit.  This is the model of the universe that the game works under.  Think of it as a simulation of a world, how do all the pieces interact?  This actually can be a very large section.

#### 3.2.1.  Physics – How does the physical universe work?
Everything works as expected. Gravity, math, and all the fun stuff is still there. There are unique and/or unnatural beings that may bend or break rules though. More to come as those things are specified.

#### 3.2.2.  Movement in the game
Normally we're looking at freely moving left and right with jumping, ducking, rolling, climbing, swimming, etc. as necessary to navigate the environment.

#### 3.2.3.  Objects – how to pick them up and move them
Most objects will likely be unique items that grant a new ability/appearance to a character. Outside of that there will probably be items to pick up and save in an inventory, though inventory management is not going to happen. Think of just about everything as a key item required for progression.

#### 3.2.4.  Actions, including whatever switches and buttons are used, interacting with objects, and what means of communication are used
TBA based on what is called for by the story.

#### 3.2.5.  Combat – If there is combat or even conflict, how is this specifically modeled?
Depends on the situation. Since each situation should be unique there will likely be times that you're fighting hand-to-hand, times when you're manning the cannons on a ship, climbing and stabbing Shadow of the Collosus style, aiming with a bow, etc. As the story is approved we'll have more to define here.

#### 3.2.6.  Economy – What is the economy of the game? How does it work?
There's a currency used by the majority of the people you interact with, but what's worth more is your relationships built with these people. For instance, you want a particular merchant to decide to expand in a province that will help the your side more than your enemy. He could be bribed for a large amount of money or you could do a favor or two for him to grease the wheels a bit.

#### 3.2.7.  Screen Flow -- A graphical description of how each screen is related to every other and a description of the purpose of each screen.
Home Screen: where you start the game. There's a new game button and a load button.
Cutscene Screen: A cutscene will be loaded and played. Give the player a skip button after they've seen it once.
Mission Screen: UI changes per mission.
Night Screen: Dialog flows with occasional buttons to show choices for the characters.

### 3.3.    Game Options – What are the options and how do they affect game play and mechanics?
For the most part, dialog is where options are presented and explored. If possible, there should be at least two ways of proceeding through a conversation. We have the "intended experience" where the family encounters difficulties but finds a way to overcome and comes out better for it, but we should allow some wiggle room for player agency. For example, let's say that Esta starts talking back to Dia (because, you know, she'll be a teenager at points in this game). Dia is under immense pressure at pretty much all times so it's entirely reasonable that she might snap back at some point. I don't think these moments should drastically change the outcome of the game, but they can make for differing levels of anxiety, anger, and ultimately closure by the end. The intended experience would be everyone is more or less relieved at the end, but if the player chooses a few too many of the alternate options by the end the charcter may be wondering if it was worth it all.

### 3.4.    Replaying and Saving
Replaying should be used to explore different story options if there are any. We're not out to create a new game plus mode with hours and hours of replay value. Remember: we're here to tell a story and tell it well. As for saving, we all have busy lives. The player should be able to save and reload from just about any point.

### 3.5.    Cheats and Easter Eggs
There should not be any cheats. Easter eggs should not be related to the game if possible. Like, I don't want to have the player be able to glitch past a barrier if they press buttons a weird way and there's a strange item that may or may not confirm some strange fan theory. That's not what this game is about. Stick to hiding shoutouts to loved ones or something like that.

## 4.  Story, Setting and Character

### 4.1.    Story and Narrative – Includes back story, plot elements, game progression, and cut scenes.  Cut scenes descriptions include the actors, the setting, and the storyboard or script.

### 4.2.    Game World

#### 4.2.1.  General look and feel of world

#### 4.2.2.  Areas, including the general description and physical characteristics as well as how it relates to the rest of the world (what levels use it, how it connects to other areas)

### 4.3.    Characters.  Each character should include the back story, personality, appearance, animations, abilities, relevance to the story and relationship to other characters

## 5.  Levels

### 5.1.    Levels.  Each level should include a synopsis, the required introductory material (and how it is provided), the objectives, and the details of what happens in the level.  Depending on the game, this may include the physical description of the map, the critical path that the player needs to take, and what encounters are important or incidental.

### 5.2.    Training Level

## 6.  Interface

### 6.1.    Visual System.  If you have a HUD, what is on it?  What menus are you displaying? What is the camera model?

### 6.2.    Control System – How does the game player control the game?   What are the specific commands?

### 6.3.    Audio, music, sound effects

### 6.4.    Help System

## 7.  Artificial Intelligence

### 7.1.    Opponent  and Enemy AI – The active opponent that plays against the game player and therefore requires strategic decision making

### 7.2.    Non-combat and Friendly Characters

### 7.3.    Support AI -- Player and Collision Detection, Pathfinding

## 8.  Technical

### 8.1.    Target Hardware
We're aiming at being able to run on any modern browser. If the browser supports HTML5, we should be able to run there.

### 8.2.    Development hardware and software, including Game Engine
Engine: [Phaser](https://phaser.io/)

### 8.3.    Network requirements
Slightly more than nothing. IF you can connect to the internet, you should be able to run this game.

## 9.  Game Art – Key assets, how they are being developed.  Intended style.
Until concept art starts rolling in, we're looking at a style akin to Samurai Jack in terms of deliberate simplicity, sharp contrasts, and smooth movements. The general color scheme should be reminiscent of late afternoon in Breath of the Wild.
